# Security Considerations

The "ietf-alto" and "ietf-alto-stats" YANG modules specified in this document define a schema for data
that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such
as NETCONF {{!RFC6241}} or RESTCONF {{!RFC8040}}.  The lowest NETCONF layer
is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory-to-implement secure
transport is Secure Shell (SSH) {{!RFC6242}}.  The lowest RESTCONF layer
is HTTPS, and the mandatory-to-implement secure transport is TLS
{{!RFC8446}}.

The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) {{!RFC8341}}
provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or
RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or
RESTCONF protocol operations and content.

There are a number of data nodes defined in these two YANG modules that are
writable/creatable/deletable (i.e., config true, which is the
default).  These data nodes may be considered sensitive or vulnerable
in some network environments.  Write operations (e.g., edit-config)
and delete operations to these data nodes without proper protection
or authentication can have a negative effect on network operations.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/
vulnerability:

  "/alto/alto-client/server-discovery":
  : This subtree specifies a set of parameters for an ALTO client to discover ALTO servers.
  Unauthorized access to it could cause intruders to modify the ALTO discovery
  parameters (e.g., "dns-server") in order to expose an ALTO client to fake ALTO servers. Likewise, this data node can be manipulated to prevent an ALTO client from discovering a reachable ALTO server.

  "/alto/alto-server/auth-client":
  : This list specifies all the authenticated ALTO clients on an ALTO server.
  Unauthorized write access to this list can allow intruders to modify the entries
  so as to add a client that have not been authenticated yet or delete a client
  that has already been authenticated. Likewise, this data node can be manipulated to prevent access of legitimate ALTO clients.

  "/alto/alto-server/role":
  : This list specifies roles which authenticated ALTO clients were assigned to for
  access control. Unauthorized write access to this list allow intruders to
  modify the entries so as to permit access that should not be permitted, or deny
  access that should be permitted.

Some of the readable data nodes in the "ietf-alto" YANG module may be considered
sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments. It is thus important to
control read access (e.g., via get, get-config, or notification) to these data
nodes. These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:

  "/alto/alto-server/logging-system":
  : This subtree provides configuration to select a logging system to capture log
  messages generated by an ALTO server. Unauthorized read access of this node
  can allow intruders to access logging information, which could be used to craft
  an attack the server.

The "ietf-alto" supports an HTTP listen mode to cover cases where the ALTO
server stack does not handle the TLS termination itself, but is handled by a
separate component. Special care should be considered when such mode is
enabled. Note that the default listen mode is "https".

Also, please be aware that these modules include choice nodes that can be augmented
by other extended modules. The augmented data nodes may be considered sensitive
or vulnerable in some network environments. For instance, an augmented case of
the "source-params" choice in "data-source" may include authentication
information about how to access a data source including private network
information. The "yang-datastore" case in [](#example-data-source) is such an
example. The "restconf" and "netconf" nodes in it may reveal the access to a
private YANG datastore. Thus, those extended modules may have the NACM
extension "default-deny-all" set.

These modules use groupings defined in other RFCs that
define data nodes that do set the NACM "default-deny-all" and
"default-deny-write" extensions. Specifically, the following data nodes
reuse groupings with their security considerations:

  "/alto/alto-server/listen/http/http-server-parameters":
  : This subtree reuses the "http-server-grouping" grouping defined in
  {{I-D.ietf-netconf-http-client-server}}. The security considerations of
  {{I-D.ietf-netconf-http-client-server}} have been applied to it.
  Specifically, the "server-name" and "client-authentication" nodes in it
  may be considered sensitive or vulnerable. For this reason, the NACM
  extension "default-deny-write" has been applied to them.

  "/alto/alto-server/listen/https/http-server-parameters":
  : This subtree reuses the "http-server-grouping" grouping defined in
  {{I-D.ietf-netconf-http-client-server}}. The security considerations of
  {{I-D.ietf-netconf-http-client-server}} have been applied to it.
  Specifically, the "server-name"and "client-authentication" nodes in it
  may be considered sensitive or vulnerable. For this reason, the NACM
  extension "default-deny-write" has been applied to them.

  "/alto/alto-server/listen/https/tls-server-parameters":
  : This subtree reuses the "tls-server-grouping" grouping defined in
  {{RFC9645}}. The security considerations of
  {{RFC9645}} have been applied to it.
  Specifically, all the "key" and "private-key" data nodes in it have the
  NACM extension "default-deny-all" set, thus preventing unrestricted
  read-access to the cleartext key values. Also, all writable data nodes
  in it may be considered sensitive or vulnerable. For this reason, the
  NACM extension "default-deny-write" has been applied to them.

# IANA Considerations

This document registers the following URIs in the "IETF XML Registry" {{RFC3688}}:

      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-alto
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.

      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-alto-stats
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.

This document registers the following two YANG modules in the "YANG Module Names" registry
{{RFC6020}}:

      Name: ietf-alto
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-alto
      Prefix: alto
      Maintained by IANA: N
      Reference: [RFC XXXX]

      Name: ietf-alto-stats
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-alto-stats
      Prefix: alto-stats
      Maintained by IANA: N
      Reference: [RFC XXXX]

<!-- End of sections -->
